CHAPTER TWELVE
At nine o'clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of chocolate on a tray,
and opened the shutters. Dorian was sleeping quite peacefully, lying on his right side,
with one hand underneath his cheek. He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play
or study. The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he awoke, and as he opened
his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he had been having some delightful
dream, yet he had not dreamed at all. His night had been untroubled by any images of
pleasure or of pain, but youth smiles without any reason. It is one of its chiefest charms.
He turned round, and leaning on his elbow, began to drink his chocolate. The mellow November
sun was streaming into the room. The sky was bright blue, and there was a genial warmth
in the air. It was almost like a morning in May.
Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with a silent, blood-stained feet into
his brain, and reconstructed themselves there with terrible distinctness. He winced at the
memory of all that he had suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing
for Basil Hallward, that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair, came back to him,
and he grew cold with passion. The dead man was still sitting there, too, and in the sunlight
now. How horrible that was! Such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day.
He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken or grow mad.
There were sins whose fascination was more in the memory than in the doing of them, strange
triumphs that gratified the pride more than the passions, and gave to the intellect a
quickened sense of joy greater than any joy they brought or could ever bring to the senses.
But this was not one of them. It was a thing to be driven out of the mind, to be drugged
with poppies, to be strangled, lest it might strangle one itself.
He passed his hand across his forehead, and then got up hastily, and dressed himself with
even more than his usual attention, giving a good deal of care to the selection of his
neck-tie and scarf-pin, and had changed his rings more than once. He spent a long time
over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valid about some new liveries
that he was thinking of getting made for the servants at Celebi, and going through his
correspondence. Over some of the letters he smiled. Three of them bored him. One he read
several times over, and then tore it up with a slight look of annoyance in his face. That
awful thing! A woman's memory, as Lord Henry had once said.
When he drank his coffee he sat down at the table, and wrote two letters. One he put in
his pocket, the other he handed to the valet.
Take this round to 152 Hurtford Street, Francis, and if Mr. Campbell is out of town, get his
address. As soon as he was alone he lit a cigarette, and began sketching upon a piece
of paper, drawing flowers and bits of architecture first, and then faces. Suddenly he remarked
that every face that he drew seemed to have an extraordinary likeness to Basil Hallward.
He frowned, and getting up, went over to the bookcase, and took out a volume at Hazard.
He was determined that he would not think about what had happened, till it became absolutely
necessary to do so.
When he stretched himself on the sofa he looked at the title page of the book. It was gautier
Émaux à calmes. The binding was citrine-green leather with a design of gilt trellis work
and dotted pomegranates. It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton. As he turned over
the pages his eye fell on the poem about the hand of La Sénère, the cold yellow hand
du souplice encore mal levé, with its downy red hairs and its doigt de faim. He glanced
at his own white taper fingers and passed on, till he came to those lovely verses upon
Venice.
Sur une gamme chromatique les scènes des perles russelon lave-nous des lièdrettes
de l'huile son corps rose et blanque. Le dôme, sur l'azur des ondes, soulevait la phrase
à peu contour. C'est efflué comme des gores rondes que soulevait un soupir d'humour. Les
squiffes à bord et de mes disposés jetant son amarde à pilier. Devant une façade rose
sur les maubres d'une escalier. How exquisite they were! As one read them one seemed to
be floating down the green waterways of the pink and pearl city, lying in a black gondola
with silver prow and trailing curtains. The mere lines looked to him like those straight
lines of turquoise-blue that follow as one pushes out to the lido. The sudden flashes
of colour reminded him of the gleam of the opal and iris-throoted birds that flutter
round the tall honeycomb campanal, or stalk, with such stately grace through the dim arcades.
Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he kept saying over and over to himself,
Devant une façade rose sur les maubres d'une escalier. The whole of Venice was in those
two lines. He remembered the autumn that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that
had stirred him to delightful, fantastic follies. There was romance in every place, but Venice,
like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and background was everything, or almost everything.
Basil had been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintorette. Poor Basil!
What a horrible way for a man to die!
He sighed, and took up the book again, and tried to forget. He read of the swallows that
fly in and out of the little cafe at Smyrna, where the hajis sit counting their amber beans
and their turbaned merchants smoke their long, tasseled pipes, and talk gravely to
each other, of the obelisk in the Palace de la Concorde, that weeps tears of granite in
its lonely, sunless exile, and longs to be back by the hot, lotus-covered Nile, where
there are sphinxes and rose-red ibises and white vultures with gilded claws and crocodiles,
with small barrel-eyes that crawl over the green steaming mud, and of that curious statue
that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the monstre charmant that couches in the porphyry
room at the Louvre.
But after a time the book fell from his hand, he grew nervous, and a horrible fit of terror
came over him. What if Alan Campbell should be out of England? Days would elapse before
he could come back. Perhaps he might refuse to come. What could he do then? Every moment
was of vital importance.
They had been great friends once, five years before, almost inseparable indeed. Then the
intimacy had come suddenly to an end. When they met in society now, it was only during
Grey who smiled. Alan Campbell never did.
He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real appreciation of the visible
arts, and whatever little sense of beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely
from Dorian. His dominant intellectual passion was for science. At Cambridge he had spent
a great deal of time working in the laboratory, and had taken a good class in the Natural
Science Tripos of his year. Indeed, he was still devoted to the study of chemistry, and
had a laboratory of his own, in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to
the annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for Parliament, and
had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up prescriptions. He was an excellent
musician, however, as well, and played both the violin and the piano better than most
amateurs. In fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Grey together, music
and the indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to be able to exercise whenever he
wished, and indeed exercised often without being conscious of it.
They had met at Lady Berkshire's the night Rubenstein had played there, and after that
used to be always seen together at the opera, and wherever good music was going on. For
eighteen months their intimacy lasted. Campbell was always either at Selby Royal or in Grosvenor
Square. To him, as to many others, Dorian Grey was the type of everything that is wonderful
and fascinating in life. Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one
ever knew, but suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when they met, and that
Campbell seemed always to go away early from any party at which Dorian Grey was present.
He had changed too, was strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing
music of any passionate character, and would never himself play, giving as an excuse when
he was called upon that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time left to practice.
And this was certainly true, every day he seemed to become more interested in biology,
and his name appeared once or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with
certain curious experiments. This was the man that Dorian Grey was waiting for, pacing
up and down the room, glancing every moment of the clock, and becoming horribly agitated
as the minutes went by. At last the door opened, and his servant entered.
"'Mr. Alan Campbell, sir.' A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour
came back to his cheeks. Ask him to come in at once, Francis.' The man bowed and retired.
In a few moments Alan Campbell walked in, looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor
being intensified by his cold, black hair and dark eyebrows.
"'Alan, this is good of you. I thank you for coming.'
"'I had intended never to enter your house again, Grey. But you said it was a matter
of life and death.' His voice was hard and cold. He spoke with slow deliberation.
There was a look of contempt in the steady searching gaze that he turned upon Dorian.
He kept his hands in the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and appeared not to have noticed the
gesture with which he had been greeted.
"'It is a matter of life and death, Alan. And to more than one person, sit down.'
Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him. The two men's eyes met.
In Dorian there was infinite pity. He knew that what he was going to do was dreadful.
After a strained moment of silence he leaned across and said very quietly, but watching
the effect of each word upon the face of the man he had sent for,
"'Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room to which nobody but myself has
access. A dead man is seated at a table. He has been dead ten hours now. Don't stir,
and don't look at me like that. Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters
that do not concern you. What you have to do is this. Stop, Grey. I don't want to know
anything further. Whether what you have told me is true or not true doesn't concern me.
I entirely decline to be mixed up in your life. Keep your horrible secrets to yourself.
They don't interest me any more. No, Alan, they will have to interest you. This one will
have to interest you. I am awfully sorry for you, Alan, but I can't help myself. You are
the one man who is able to save me. I am forced to bring you into the matter. I have no option.
Alan, you are a scientist. You know about chemistry and things of that kind. You have
made experiments. What you have got to do is destroy the thing that is upstairs, to
destroy it so that not a vestige will be left of it. Nobody saw this person come into the
house. Indeed, at the present moment he is supposed to be in Paris. He will not be missed
for months. When he is missed there must be no trace of him found here. You, Alan, you
must change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes, that I may
scatter in the air. You are mad, Dorian. I was waiting for you to call me Dorian. You
are mad, I tell you, mad to imagine that I would raise a finger to help you, mad to make
this monstrous confession. I will have nothing to do with this matter, whatever it is. Do
you think I am going to peril my reputation for you? What is it to me what devil's work
you are up to? It was a suicide, Alan. I am glad of that. But who drove him to it? You,
I should fancy. Do you still refuse to do this for me? Of course I refuse. I will have
absolutely nothing to do with it. I don't care what shame comes upon you. You deserve
it all. I should not be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced. How dare you
ask me of all men in the world to mix myself up in this horror. I should have thought you
knew more about people's characters. Your friend Lord Henry Wooten can't have taught
you much about psychology, whatever else he has taught you. Nothing will induce me to
a step to help you. You have come to the wrong man. Go to some of your friends. Don't come
to me. Alan, it was murder. I killed him. You don't know what he made me suffer. Whatever
my life is, he had more to do with the making or the marring of it than poor Harry has had.
He may have not intended it, but the result is the same. Murder! Good God, Dorian! Is
that what you have come to? I shall not inform upon you. It is not my business. Besides,
you are certain to be arrested, without my stirring in the matter. Nobody ever commits
a murder without doing something stupid. But I will have nothing to do with it. All I ask
of you is to perform a certain scientific experiment. You go to hospitals and dead houses,
and the horrors that you do there don't affect you. If in some hideous dissecting room or
fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a leaden table with red gutters scooped
out in it, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject. You would not turn
a hair. You would not believe that you were doing anything wrong. On the contrary, you
would probably feel that you were benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge
in the world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind. What I want you
to do is simply what you have often done before. Indeed, to destroy a body must be less horrible
than what you are accustomed to work at. And remember, it is the only piece of evidence
against me. If it is discovered, I am lost, and it is sure to be discovered unless you
help me. I have no desire to help you. You forget that. I am simply indifferent to the
whole thing. It has nothing to do with me. Alan, I entreat you. Think of the position
I am in. Just before you came I almost fainted with terror. No, don't think of that. Look
at the matter purely from the scientific point of view. You don't inquire where the dead
things on which you experiment come from. Don't inquire now. I have told you too much
as it is, but I beg of you to do this. We were once friends, Alan. Don't speak of those
days, Dorian. They are dead. The dead linger sometimes. The man upstairs will not go away.
He is sitting at the table with a bowed head and outstretched arms. Alan, if you don't
come to my assistance, I am ruined. Why, they will hang me, Alan. Don't you understand?
They will hang me for what I have done. There is no good in prolonging this scene. I refuse
absolutely to do anything in the matter. It is insane of you to ask me. You refuse? Absolutely?
Yes.
The same look of pity came into Dorian's eyes. Then he stretched out his hand, took a piece
of paper and wrote something on it. He read it over twice, folded it carefully and pushed
it across the table. Having done this he got up and went over to the window. Campbell looked
at him in surprise and then took up the paper and opened it. As he read it his face became
ghastly pale and he fell back in his chair. A horrible sense of sickness came over him.
He felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow. After two or
three minutes of terrible silence Dorian turned around and came and stood behind him, putting
his hand upon his shoulder.
"'I am so sorry, Alan,' he murmured, "'but you leave me no alternative. I have a letter
written already. Here it is. You see the address? If you don't help me I must send it. You know
what the result will be. But you are going to help me. It is impossible for you to refuse
now. I tried to spare you. You will do me the justice to admit that. You were stern,
harsh, offensive. You treated me as no man has ever dared to treat me, no living man
at any rate. I bore it all. Now it is for me to dictate the terms.'
Campbell buried his face in his hands and a shudder passed through him.
"'Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan. You know what they are. The thing is quite
simple. Um, don't work yourself into this fever. This thing has to be done. Face it
and do it.'
A groan broke from Campbell's lips and he shivered all over. The ticking of the clock
on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing time into separate atoms of agony, each of
which was too terrible to be borne. He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened
round his forehead, and as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already come
upon him. The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead. It was intolerable. It
seemed to crush him.
"'Come, Alan. You must decide at once.' He hesitated for a moment.
"'Is there a fire in the room upstairs?' he murmured.
"'Yes. There is a gas-fire with asbestos.'
"'I will have to go home and get some things from the laboratory.'
"'No, Alan. You need not leave the house. Write on a sheet of note-paper what you want
and my servant will take a cab and bring the things back to you.'
Campbell wrote a few lines, blotted them and addressed an envelope to his assistant. Dorian
took the note up and read it carefully. Then he rang the bell and gave it to his valet
with orders to return as soon as possible and to bring the things with him. When the
all doors shut, Campbell started, and having got up from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece.
He was shivering with a sort of ague. For nearly twenty minutes neither of the men spoke.
A fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was like a beat of a
hammer.
As the chimes struck one, Campbell turned around and, looking at Dorian Gray, saw that
his eyes were filled with tears. There was something in the purity and refinement of
that sad face that seemed to enrage him.
"'You are infamous, absolutely infamous,' he muttered.
"'Hush, Alan. You have saved my life,' said Dorian.
"'Your life? Heavens, what a life that is! You have gone from corruption to corruption,
and now you have culminated in crime. In doing what I am going to do, what you force me to
do, it is not your life that I am thinking.'
"'Oh, Alan,' murmured Dorian with a sigh.
"'I wish you had a thousandth part of the pity for me that I have for you.'
He turned away as he spoke, and stood looking out at the garden. Campbell made no answer.
After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant entered carrying a mahogany
chest of chemicals with a small electric battery set on top of it. He placed it on the table
and went out again, returning with a long coil of steel and platinum wire and two rather
curiously shaped iron clamps.
"'Shall I leave the things here, sir?' he asked Campbell.
"'Yes,' said Dorian. "'And I am afraid, Francis, that I have another errand for you. What is
the name of the man at Richmond who supplies Selby with orchids?'
"'Harden, sir. Yes, Hardin. He must go down to Richmond at once, see Hardin personally,
and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I ordered, and to have as few white ones
as possible. In fact, I don't want any white ones. It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond
is a very pretty place. Otherwise I wouldn't bother you about it.'
"'No trouble, sir. And what time shall I be back?'
Dorian looked at Campbell.
"'How long will your experiment take, Alan?' he said in a calm and different voice. The
presence of a third person in the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage. Campbell
frowned and bit his lip.
"'It will take about five hours,' he answered.
"'It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven, Francis. Or stay.
"'Just leave my things out for dressing. You can have the evening to yourself. I am
not dining at home, so I shall not want you.'
"'Thank you, sir,' said the man, leaving the room.
"'Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost. How heavy this chest is! I'll take
it for you. You bring the other things.' He spoke rapidly and in an authoritative manner.
Campbell felt dominated by him. They left the room together. When they reached the top
landing, Dorian took out the key and turned it in the lock. Then he stopped, and a troubled
look came into his eyes. He shuddered.
"'I don't think I can go in, Alan,' he murmured.
"'It is nothing to me. I don't require you,' said Campbell, coldly. Dorian half opened
the door. As he did so, he saw the face of the portrait, grinning in the sunlight. On
the floor in front of it the torn curtain was lying. He remembered that the night before,
for the first time in his life, he had forgotten to hide it when he crept out of the room.
But what was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet, and glistening on one of the hands, as
though the canvas had sweated blood? How horrible it was! More horrible, it seemed to him for
the moment, than the silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table. The thing
whose grotesque, misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that it had not stirred,
but was still there as he left it.
He opened the door a little wider and walked quickly in, with half-closed eyes and an averted
head, determined that he would not look even once upon the dead man. Then, stooping down
and taking up the gold and purple hanging, he flung it over the picture. He stopped,
feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed themselves on the intricacies of the
pattern before him. He heard Campbell bringing in the heavy chest and the irons and the other
things that he had required for his dreadful work. He began to wonder if he and Basil Hallward
had ever met, and if so, what they had thought of each other.
"'Leave me now,' said Campbell.
He turned and hurried out, just as conscious that the dead man had been thrust back into
the chair and was sitting in it, with Campbell gazing into the glistening yellow face. As
he was going downstairs he heard the key being turned in the lock.
"'It was long after seven o'clock when Campbell came back into the library. He was pale, but
absolutely calm.'
"'I have done what you asked me to do,' he muttered, and now good-bye. Let us never see
each other again.'
"'You have saved me from ruin, Ellen.'
"'I cannot forget that,' said Dorian simply. As soon as Campbell had left he went upstairs.
There was a horrible smell of chemicals in the room, but the thing that had been sitting
at the table was gone.'
End of chapter 12